README.adoc, before:

Audiobook Player
=================

Raspberry Pi-based audiobook player with easy to use interface and text-to-speech 
output for book selection.

image::doc/player1.jpg[]

It is suprisingly difficult to find an easy to use commercial version of a 
player specifically designed to play audio books with the following requirements:

* Very easy to use, in particular for elderly persons with impared eyesight. Tiny displays, 
  tiny buttons, and lots of functions *won't work!*
* The device should always keep track of the current book and reading position. 
  Turning the device on should automatically continue reading from the last position.
* Skipping forward to a particular chapter in a book ist *not* a requirement.
* Device should be able to store lots of audio books. Selection of a particular book 
  should be as simple as possible.
  
As it seems, a few people had very similar requirements and already built such devices.

For example, there is the http://blogs.fsfe.org/clemens/2012/10/30/the-one-button-audiobook-player[One Button Audiobook Player]. This is a very cool project with a UI as simple as it gets. However, it can only 
handle one single book at a time.

Then there is Willem van der Jagt's https://gist.github.com/wkjagt/814b3f62ea03c7b1a765[BookPlayer],
which has all the required features. For selection of a specific audio book, it uses a
built-in RFID reader. Each book is associated with an RFID tag and reading the tag selects 
the book and starts reading. Although using RFID is pretty slick, I did not like the
idea of having to deal with a bunch of tags in addition to the player.

I therefore decided to use Willem van der Jagt's design as a basis, but to remove the RFID
feature. Instead, I added a button which allows the user to cycle through the stored books.
Author and title of a selected book are read to the user using a text-to-speech engine.

For maintenance or for updating the audio books on the player, I plug a WIFI dongle into an
USB port, which automatically connects to my network. I then use ssh for maintenance and sftp
for transferring books. On Windows, WinSCP works very well, too.

== Hardware

image::doc/player2.jpg[]

The hardware is pretty straightforward, this is what I used:

* Raspberry Pi (I still had a model B Rev. 1, one of the very earliest ones.)
* SD card. I used one with 8 GB I had lying around, which is good enough for about 10 books, depending
on the size of the MP3 files.
* Case. The one I used is called http://www.reichelt.de/Kunststoff-Kleingehaeuse/EUROBOX-SW/3/index.html?&ACTION=3&LA=2&ARTICLE=50429&GROUPID=3355&artnr=EUROBOX+SW[Euro Box] from the local electronics store.
It is a surprisingly good fit. Being able to detach the front and back panels is pretty handy in case
I have to use a LAN cable or if I want to remove the SD card.
* Power switch
* 5 colored push buttons. The ones I used are pretty crappy (and cheap!), but they were the most suitable  
available at the local store.
* LED + socket
* USB cable with microB USB plug on one end. I split the cable and cut the micro USB plug open with a
sharp knife. The rest of the cable was extended and wired up with the power switch. (I think heat shrink tubing
is the most useful stuff ever!)
* 3.5mm audio jack + socket. The socket goes into the front panel and is connected with the jack
which goes into the Raspi's audio socket. To make it fit, the plastic case of the jack was discarded.
* Several old analog CD audio cables
+
image::doc/cd_audio.jpg[]
+
They work very well for connecting buttons and LED to the pin header. There are only
three wires per plug, but that can be easily fixed by carefully removing one wire
from another spare plug and inserting it into the empty position.

The following picture shows how buttons and LED are wired to the plugs
and the position of the plugs on the pin header.

image::doc/buttons.png[]

Since my version of the Raspberry Pi had no mounting holes, I used the bottom part of
a cheap Raspberry Pi case for mounting. The bottom was glued with epoxy to the 
mounting posts of the Euro Box, as can be seen in the picture above.

== Software

Most stuff regarding installation can be found on Willem van der Jagt's 
http://willemvanderjagt.com/2014/08/16/audio-book-reader/[Blog].

Since did a few things differently, I'll try to document the full installation process.

=== Install and Configure Raspbian 

Download https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads/[Raspian] and install it on your SD card. The card should
be 8GB or greater in order to hold the operating system and a number of books. 

NOTE: The following describes a remote installation because I did not want to bother with 
attaching keyboard and monitor to the Pi.

Connect the Pi to your network with a LAN cable, boot and logon to the Pi via ssh (or putty on Windows)

----
$ ssh pi@raspberrypi
----

Password of user `pi` is `raspberry`.

Basic configuration:

----
$ sudo raspi-config 
----

Make sure to choose `Expand Filesystem` to make Rasbian use the whole SD card. 
You should also `Change User Password`.  
Under `Advanced Options`, you may also 
want to change the hostname of the Pi from `raspberry` to something more 
meaningful, e.g. `bookplayer`.

Finish the configuration dialog with rebooting the Pi and ssh to the Pi again
using your changed hostname and password:

----
$ ssh pi@bookplayer
----

Update your Raspbian:

----
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get upgrade
----

Force audio through the 3.5 Audio jack:

----
$ sudo amixer cset numid=3 1
----

If you want to use WIFI to access your Pi, it must be configured. I simply used
the https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/wireless/wireless-cli.md[command line].

=== Music Player Daemon (MPD)

This software uses the http://www.musicpd.org/[Music Player Daemon] as the backend.

----
$ sudo apt-get install mpd
----

Keeping track of the current book and autoplaying will be controlled by the client frontend. To
avoid potential conflicts, we have to configure MPD to *not* automatically keep track of the current 
book and start autoplaying a book on startup. This is done by editing `/etc/mpd.conf` and
by commenting or deleting the line starting with

----
state_file ...
----

You may also want to change the `music_directory` parameter
to a directory different from `/var/lib/mpd/music`, for example to a directory under the user's home directory.

Restart `mpd`:

----
$ sudo service mpd restart
----

Install a simple commandline client for mpd:

----
$ sudo apt-get install mpc
----

Next, the https://github.com/Mic92/python-mpd2[python-mpd2] client library must be installed. 
I used `pip` for installation, which must be installed first:

----
$ sudo apt-get install python-pip
$ sudo pip install python-mpd2
----

Install `Sqlite3` database:

----
$ sudo apt-get install sqlite3
----

=== Text to Speech

For text-to-speech conversion I used Google's 
https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/svox/[SVOX Pico] for Android, which 
provides a much better quality than eSpeak.

I used a precompiled http://www.dr-bischoff.de/raspi/pico2wave.deb[SVOX-Pico Debian package for ARM]
provided by Andreas Bischoff. After downloading, install it with

----
$ cd
$ sudo apt-get install libpopt-dev
$ wget http://www.dr-bischoff.de/raspi/pico2wave.deb
$ sudo dpkg --install pico2wave.deb
----

=== Installation of BookPlayer

Clone this project to the `pi` user's home directory:

----
$ cd
$ git clone https://github.com/nerk/BookPlayer
----

To configure the `sqlite` database, do the following:

----
$ cd BookPlayer
$ sqlite3 state.db

sqlite> .read db.sql
sqlite> .exit
----

== TTS Language Configuration

The language configuration for the text-to-speech engine is hardcoded in the code and
currently set to german. Find the following line in `main.py`:

----
subprocess.call(["pico2wave", "-lde-DE", "-w/tmp/tts.wav", text])
----

To change it to US-english, for example, modify it a follows:

----
subprocess.call(["pico2wave", "-len-US", "-w/tmp/tts.wav", text])
----

== GPIO Numbering and Board Revisions

CAUTION: GPIO numbering changed between board revisions. If your board is Rev. 2 (most likely),
you must make a small change in file config.py!

[source,python]
----
gpio_pins = [
    { 'pin_id': 21, 'callback' : 'rewind', 'bounce_time' : 2000 }, # Board Rev. 1
    #{ 'pin_id': 27, 'callback' : 'rewind', 'bounce_time' : 2000 }, # Board Rev. 2
    { 'pin_id': 11, 'callback' : 'toggle_pause', 'bounce_time' : 2000 },
    { 'pin_id': 9, 'callback' : 'next_title', 'bounce_time' : 2000 },
    { 'pin_id': 22, 'callback' : 'volume_down', 'bounce_time' : 1000 },
    { 'pin_id': 10, 'callback' : 'volume_up', 'bounce_time' : 1000 }
]
----

=== Autostart on Boot

The player must be configured to start automatically playing 
the current book when booting the pi.

----
$ sudo nano /etc/rc.local
----

After the initial block of comments, add the following line:

----
/home/pi/BookPlayer/start &
----

Save and exit the editor. Make the `start` script executable:

----
chmod 755 /home/pi/BookPlayer/start
----

Reboot the Pi:

----
sudo reboot
----

=== Audiobook Structure

Audiobooks must be put into the MPD `music_directory` folder you configured above. In case you
left it unchanged it defaults to `/var/lib/mpd/music`.

The directory structure for each book is pretty simple and as follows:

----
author name/
   title of the book/
      01-first track.mp3
      02-second track.mp3
      03-third track.mp3
----

For a multi-disc book, the tracks of all CDs must be in a common directory with 
appropriate track numbering, e.g.:

----
author name/
   title of the book/
      101-first track first cd.mp3
      102-second track first cd.mp3
      201-first track second cd.mp3
      202-second track second cd.mp3
----

The player will speak the author's name and the title of the book by reading
the directory names. Each track must start with a unique number in correct order, followed by
a dash with the suffix of `.mp3`. The actual name of the track is arbitrary.

A very convenient way to create this structure is to rip CDs with https://code.google.com/p/abcde[abcde] (on 
your main computer and not on the Pi, of course). 
It will also handle multi CD books when used with commandline option `-W`, followed by
the number of the CD:

----
$ abcde -W1 -c abcde_book.conf
$ abcde -W2 -c abcde_book.conf
...
----

The configuration file `abcde_book.conf` is included in the main directory of this
project. Copy it to the computer you are using for ripping and use it accordingly.

The most important configuration parameter inside this file is `OUTPUTFORMAT`:

----
OUTPUTFORMAT='${ARTISTFILE}/${ALBUMFILE}/${TRACKNUM}-${TRACKFILE}'
----

This will produce track names in the correct format.

== Shortcomings and Improvements

* Using a switch to simply cut off power is not a good idea. Pi should be shutdown properly.
* Checking of changes to the currently selected book in the main
loop by polling is not really a good implementation.
* The way button presses are handled could be improved. Implementation
  of an event queue might be a way to ensure that no button events are lost.
* Parts of the code might not really be thread-safe, should be reviewed.
* The language configuration for the text-to-speech engine is hardcoded.
This does not work if the author's name is in a foreign language
or a title contains foreign language words.

== Copyright and License

Copyright (C) 2015 Thomas Kern


Licensed under MIT License. See https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nerk/BookPlayer/master/LICENSE.txt[LICENSE] for details.


Based on https://github.com/wkjagt/BookPlayer[BookPlayer],
Copyright (C) Willem van der Jagt.

Commit message:

disable power down of WIFI dongle when idle

README.adoc, after:

Audiobook Player
=================

Raspberry Pi-based audiobook player with easy to use interface and text-to-speech 
output for book selection.

image::doc/player1.jpg[]

It is suprisingly difficult to find an easy to use commercial version of a 
player specifically designed to play audio books with the following requirements:

* Very easy to use, in particular for elderly persons with impared eyesight. Tiny displays, 
  tiny buttons, and lots of functions *won't work!*
* The device should always keep track of the current book and reading position. 
  Turning the device on should automatically continue reading from the last position.
* Skipping forward to a particular chapter in a book ist *not* a requirement.
* Device should be able to store lots of audio books. Selection of a particular book 
  should be as simple as possible.
  
As it seems, a few people had very similar requirements and already built such devices.

For example, there is the http://blogs.fsfe.org/clemens/2012/10/30/the-one-button-audiobook-player[One Button Audiobook Player]. This is a very cool project with a UI as simple as it gets. However, it can only 
handle one single book at a time.

Then there is Willem van der Jagt's https://gist.github.com/wkjagt/814b3f62ea03c7b1a765[BookPlayer],
which has all the required features. For selection of a specific audio book, it uses a
built-in RFID reader. Each book is associated with an RFID tag and reading the tag selects 
the book and starts reading. Although using RFID is pretty slick, I did not like the
idea of having to deal with a bunch of tags in addition to the player.

I therefore decided to use Willem van der Jagt's design as a basis, but to remove the RFID
feature. Instead, I added a button which allows the user to cycle through the stored books.
Author and title of a selected book are read to the user using a text-to-speech engine.

For maintenance or for updating the audio books on the player, I plug a WIFI dongle into an
USB port, which automatically connects to my network. I then use ssh for maintenance and sftp
for transferring books. On Windows, WinSCP works very well, too.

== Hardware

image::doc/player2.jpg[]

The hardware is pretty straightforward, this is what I used:

* Raspberry Pi (I still had a model B Rev. 1, one of the very earliest ones.)
* SD card. I used one with 8 GB I had lying around, which is good enough for about 10 books, depending
on the size of the MP3 files.
* Case. The one I used is called http://www.reichelt.de/Kunststoff-Kleingehaeuse/EUROBOX-SW/3/index.html?&ACTION=3&LA=2&ARTICLE=50429&GROUPID=3355&artnr=EUROBOX+SW[Euro Box] from the local electronics store.
It is a surprisingly good fit. Being able to detach the front and back panels is pretty handy in case
I have to use a LAN cable or if I want to remove the SD card.
* Power switch
* 5 colored push buttons. The ones I used are pretty crappy (and cheap!), but they were the most suitable  
available at the local store.
* LED + socket
* USB cable with microB USB plug on one end. I split the cable and cut the micro USB plug open with a
sharp knife. The rest of the cable was extended and wired up with the power switch. (I think heat shrink tubing
is the most useful stuff ever!)
* 3.5mm audio jack + socket. The socket goes into the front panel and is connected with the jack
which goes into the Raspi's audio socket. To make it fit, the plastic case of the jack was discarded.
* Several old analog CD audio cables
+
image::doc/cd_audio.jpg[]
+
They work very well for connecting buttons and LED to the pin header. There are only
three wires per plug, but that can be easily fixed by carefully removing one wire
from another spare plug and inserting it into the empty position.

The following picture shows how buttons and LED are wired to the plugs
and the position of the plugs on the pin header.

image::doc/buttons.png[]

Since my version of the Raspberry Pi had no mounting holes, I used the bottom part of
a cheap Raspberry Pi case for mounting. The bottom was glued with epoxy to the 
mounting posts of the Euro Box, as can be seen in the picture above.

== Software

Most stuff regarding installation can be found on Willem van der Jagt's 
http://willemvanderjagt.com/2014/08/16/audio-book-reader/[Blog].

Since did a few things differently, I'll try to document the full installation process.

=== Install and Configure Raspbian 

Download https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads/[Raspian] and install it on your SD card. The card should
be 8GB or greater in order to hold the operating system and a number of books. 

NOTE: The following describes a remote installation because I did not want to bother with 
attaching keyboard and monitor to the Pi.

Connect the Pi to your network with a LAN cable, boot and logon to the Pi via ssh (or putty on Windows)

----
$ ssh pi@raspberrypi
----

Password of user `pi` is `raspberry`.

Basic configuration:

----
$ sudo raspi-config 
----

Make sure to choose `Expand Filesystem` to make Rasbian use the whole SD card. 
You should also `Change User Password`.  
Under `Advanced Options`, you may also 
want to change the hostname of the Pi from `raspberry` to something more 
meaningful, e.g. `bookplayer`.

Finish the configuration dialog with rebooting the Pi and ssh to the Pi again
using your changed hostname and password:

----
$ ssh pi@bookplayer
----

Update your Raspbian:

----
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get upgrade
----

Force audio through the 3.5 Audio jack:

----
$ sudo amixer cset numid=3 1
----

=== WIFI

If you want to use WIFI to access your Pi, it must be configured. I simply used
the https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/wireless/wireless-cli.md[command line].

Powermanagement caused some problem with my particular WIFI dongle. After some time of inactivity, the dongle shut 
down and the connection dropped. Using `lsusb` showed the following:

----
Bus 001 Device 004: ID 0bda:8176 Realtek Semiconductor Corp. RTL8188CUS 802.11n WLAN Adapter
----

The solution is to disable power down when the device is idle. This can be achieved by creating file `/etc/modprobe.d/8192cu.conf` with the following content:

----
#prevent power down of wireless when idle
options 8192cu rtw_power_mgnt=0 rtw_enusbss=0
----

=== Music Player Daemon (MPD)

This software uses the http://www.musicpd.org/[Music Player Daemon] as the backend.

----
$ sudo apt-get install mpd
----

Keeping track of the current book and autoplaying will be controlled by the client frontend. To
avoid potential conflicts, we have to configure MPD to *not* automatically keep track of the current 
book and start autoplaying a book on startup. This is done by editing `/etc/mpd.conf` and
by commenting or deleting the line starting with

----
state_file ...
----

You may also want to change the `music_directory` parameter
to a directory different from `/var/lib/mpd/music`, for example to a directory under the user's home directory.

Restart `mpd`:

----
$ sudo service mpd restart
----

Install a simple commandline client for mpd:

----
$ sudo apt-get install mpc
----

Next, the https://github.com/Mic92/python-mpd2[python-mpd2] client library must be installed. 
I used `pip` for installation, which must be installed first:

----
$ sudo apt-get install python-pip
$ sudo pip install python-mpd2
----

Install `Sqlite3` database:

----
$ sudo apt-get install sqlite3
----

=== Text to Speech

For text-to-speech conversion I used Google's 
https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/svox/[SVOX Pico] for Android, which 
provides a much better quality than eSpeak.

I used a precompiled http://www.dr-bischoff.de/raspi/pico2wave.deb[SVOX-Pico Debian package for ARM]
provided by Andreas Bischoff. After downloading, install it with

----
$ cd
$ sudo apt-get install libpopt-dev
$ wget http://www.dr-bischoff.de/raspi/pico2wave.deb
$ sudo dpkg --install pico2wave.deb
----

=== Installation of BookPlayer

Clone this project to the `pi` user's home directory:

----
$ cd
$ git clone https://github.com/nerk/BookPlayer
----

To configure the `sqlite` database, do the following:

----
$ cd BookPlayer
$ sqlite3 state.db

sqlite> .read db.sql
sqlite> .exit
----

== TTS Language Configuration

The language configuration for the text-to-speech engine is hardcoded in the code and
currently set to german. Find the following line in `main.py`:

----
subprocess.call(["pico2wave", "-lde-DE", "-w/tmp/tts.wav", text])
----

To change it to US-english, for example, modify it a follows:

----
subprocess.call(["pico2wave", "-len-US", "-w/tmp/tts.wav", text])
----

== GPIO Numbering and Board Revisions

CAUTION: GPIO numbering changed between board revisions. If your board is Rev. 2 (most likely),
you must make a small change in file config.py!

[source,python]
----
gpio_pins = [
    { 'pin_id': 21, 'callback' : 'rewind', 'bounce_time' : 2000 }, # Board Rev. 1
    #{ 'pin_id': 27, 'callback' : 'rewind', 'bounce_time' : 2000 }, # Board Rev. 2
    { 'pin_id': 11, 'callback' : 'toggle_pause', 'bounce_time' : 2000 },
    { 'pin_id': 9, 'callback' : 'next_title', 'bounce_time' : 2000 },
    { 'pin_id': 22, 'callback' : 'volume_down', 'bounce_time' : 1000 },
    { 'pin_id': 10, 'callback' : 'volume_up', 'bounce_time' : 1000 }
]
----

=== Autostart on Boot

The player must be configured to start automatically playing 
the current book when booting the pi.

----
$ sudo nano /etc/rc.local
----

After the initial block of comments, add the following line:

----
/home/pi/BookPlayer/start &
----

Save and exit the editor. Make the `start` script executable:

----
chmod 755 /home/pi/BookPlayer/start
----

Reboot the Pi:

----
sudo reboot
----

=== Audiobook Structure

Audiobooks must be put into the MPD `music_directory` folder you configured above. In case you
left it unchanged it defaults to `/var/lib/mpd/music`.

The directory structure for each book is pretty simple and as follows:

----
author name/
   title of the book/
      01-first track.mp3
      02-second track.mp3
      03-third track.mp3
----

For a multi-disc book, the tracks of all CDs must be in a common directory with 
appropriate track numbering, e.g.:

----
author name/
   title of the book/
      101-first track first cd.mp3
      102-second track first cd.mp3
      201-first track second cd.mp3
      202-second track second cd.mp3
----

The player will speak the author's name and the title of the book by reading
the directory names. Each track must start with a unique number in correct order, followed by
a dash with the suffix of `.mp3`. The actual name of the track is arbitrary.

A very convenient way to create this structure is to rip CDs with https://code.google.com/p/abcde[abcde] (on 
your main computer and not on the Pi, of course). 
It will also handle multi CD books when used with commandline option `-W`, followed by
the number of the CD:

----
$ abcde -W1 -c abcde_book.conf
$ abcde -W2 -c abcde_book.conf
...
----

The configuration file `abcde_book.conf` is included in the main directory of this
project. Copy it to the computer you are using for ripping and use it accordingly.

The most important configuration parameter inside this file is `OUTPUTFORMAT`:

----
OUTPUTFORMAT='${ARTISTFILE}/${ALBUMFILE}/${TRACKNUM}-${TRACKFILE}'
----

This will produce track names in the correct format.

== Shortcomings and Improvements

* Using a switch to simply cut off power is not a good idea. Pi should be shutdown properly.
* Checking of changes to the currently selected book in the main
loop by polling is not really a good implementation.
* The way button presses are handled could be improved. Implementation
  of an event queue might be a way to ensure that no button events are lost.
* Parts of the code might not really be thread-safe, should be reviewed.
* The language configuration for the text-to-speech engine is hardcoded.
This does not work if the author's name is in a foreign language
or a title contains foreign language words.

== Copyright and License

Copyright (C) 2015 Thomas Kern


Licensed under MIT License. See https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nerk/BookPlayer/master/LICENSE.txt[LICENSE] for details.


Based on https://github.com/wkjagt/BookPlayer[BookPlayer],
Copyright (C) Willem van der Jagt.
